@node References, C to Scheme mapping, Library modules - Utilities, Top
@appendix References
@c NODE 参考文献

@table @asis
@anchor{r5rs}
@item [R5RS]
R. Kelsey, W. Clinger, J. Rees (eds.),
Revised^5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme,
Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation, 11(1), September, 1998
and ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 33(9), October, 1998. @*
@url{http://www.schemers.org/Documents/Standards/R5RS/}.

@anchor{r7rs}
@item [R7RS]
A. Shinn, J. Cowan, A. A. Greckler (eds.),
Revised^7 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme@*
@url{http://trac.sacrideo.us/wg/raw-attachment/wiki/WikiStart/r7rs.pdf}.

@anchor{onecont}
@item [1CC]
Carl Bruggeman, Oscar Waddell and R. Kent Dybvig,
Representing control in the presence of one-shot continuations,
in @i{Proceedings of SIGPLAN '96}, pp. 99--107, 1996.

@anchor{myers86}
@item [Myers86]
Eugene Myers,
An O(ND) Difference Algorithm and Its Variations,
@i{Algorithmica} Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 251-266, 1986.

@anchor{mop}
@item [MOP]
Gregor Kiczales, Jim Des Rivieres, Daniel Bobrow,
The Art of Metaobject Protocol,
The MIT Press.

@anchor{dylan}
@item [Dylan]
Kim Barrett, Bob Cassels, Paul Haahr,
David A. Moon, Keith Playford, P. Tucker Withington,
A Monotonic Superclass Linearization for Dylan,
in @i{Proceedings of OOPSLA 96}, October 1996.@*
@url{http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=236343}.

@anchor{fairthreads}
@item [FairThreads]
F. Boussinot, Java Fair Threads, @*
@url{http://www-sop.inria.fr/mimosa/rp/FairThreads/html/FairThreads.html}.

@anchor{rfc1321}
@item [RFC1321]
R. Rivest,
The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm. @*
April 1992. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1321.txt}.

@anchor{rfc2045}
@item [RFC2045]
N. Freed, N. Borenstein: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension
(MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies,
November 1996. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2045.txt}.

@anchor{rfc2396}
@item [RFC2396]
T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter,
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax,
August 1998. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2396.txt}.

@anchor{rfc2616}
@item [RFC2616]
R. Fielding et al, Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1, June 1999. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2616.txt}.

@anchor{rfc2822}
@item [RFC2822]
P. Resnick (ed.), Internet Message Format, April 2001. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2822.txt}.

@anchor{rfc2965}
@item [RFC2965]
D. Kristol, L. Montulli, HTTP State Management Mechanism,
October 2000. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2965.txt}.

@anchor{rfc3174}
@item [RFC3174]
D. Eastlake, 3rd and P. Jones,
US Secure Hash Algorithm 1 (SHA1). @*
September 2001. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3174.txt}.

@anchor{rfc4648}
@item [RFC4648]
S. Josefsson, Ed.: The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data Encodings
October 2006. @*
@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4648.txt}.

@anchor{srfi-0}
@item [SRFI-0]
Marc Feeley, Feature-based conditional expansion construct, May  1999.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-0/srfi-0.html}.

@anchor{srfi-1}
@item [SRFI-1]
Olin Shivers, List Library, October 1999. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-1/srfi-1.html}.

@anchor{srfi-2}
@item [SRFI-2]
Oleg Kiselyov, @code{AND-LET*}: an @code{AND} with local bindings, a guarded
@code{LET*} special form, March 1998. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-2/srfi-2.html}.

@anchor{srfi-4}
@item [SRFI-4]
Marc Feeley, Homogeneous numeric vector types, May 1999.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-4/srfi-4.html}.

@anchor{srfi-6}
@item [SRFI-6]
William D Clinger, Basic String Ports, July 1999. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-6/srfi-6.html}.

@anchor{srfi-8}
@item [SRFI-8]
John David Stone, receive: Binding to multiple values, August 1999. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-8/srfi-8.html}.

@anchor{srfi-9}
@item [SRFI-9]
Richard Kelsey, Defining Record Types, September 1999.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-9/srfi-9.html}.

@anchor{srfi-10}
@item [SRFI-10]
Oleg Kiselyov, @code{#,} external form, January 2000.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-10/srfi-10.html}.

@anchor{srfi-11}
@item [SRFI-11]
Lars T Hansen, Syntax for receiving multiple values, March 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-11/srfi-11.html}.

@anchor{srfi-13}
@item [SRFI-13]
Olin Shivers, String Libraries, December 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-13/srfi-13.html}.

@anchor{srfi-14}
@item [SRFI-14]
Olin Shivers, Character-set Library, December 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-14/srfi-14.html}.

@anchor{srfi-17}
@item [SRFI-17]
Per Bothner, Generalized @code{set!}, July 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-17/srfi-17.html}.

@anchor{srfi-18}
@item [SRFI-18]
Marc Feeley, Multithreading Support, April 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-18/srfi-18.html}.

@anchor{srfi-19}
@item [SRFI-19]
Will Fitzgerald, Time Data Types and Procedures, August 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-19/srfi-19.html}.

@anchor{srfi-21}
@item [SRFI-21]
Marc Feeley, Readl-time Multithreading Support, April 2000. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-21/srfi-21.html}.

@anchor{srfi-22}
@item [SRFI-22]
Martin Gasbichler and Michael Sperber,
Running Scheme Scripts on Unix, January 2002. @*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-22/srfi-22.html}.

@anchor{srfi-23}
@item [SRFI-23]
Stephan Housen, Error reporting mechanism, April 2001.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-23/srfi-23.html}.

@anchor{srfi-25}
@item [SRFI-25]
Jussi Piitulainen, Multi-dimensional Array Primitives, June 2002.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-25/srfi-25.html}.

@anchor{srfi-26}
@item [SRFI-26]
Sebastian Egner, Notation for Specializing Parameters without Currying, June 2002.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-26/srfi-26.html}.

@anchor{srfi-27}
@item [SRFI-27]
Sebastian Egner, Sources of Random Bits, June 2002.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-27/srfi-27.html}.

@anchor{srfi-28}
@item [SRFI-28]
Scott G. Miller, Basic Format Strings, June 2002.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-28/srfi-28.html}.


@anchor{srfi-37}
@item [SRFI-37]
Anthony Carrico, Args-fold: a program argument processor, Jan. 2003.@*
@url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-37/srfi-37.html}.

@anchor{ssax}
@item [SSAX]
Oleg Kiselyov, XML and Scheme, @*
@url{http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/Scheme/xml.html}.@*
The SSAX distribution is also available at sourceforge:@*
@url{http://ssax.sourceforge.net/}.

@anchor{MT}
@item [MT]
M. Matsumoto and T. Nishimura, "Mersenne Twister: A 623-dimensionally
equidistributed uniform pseudorandom number generator", ACM Trans. on
Modeling and Computer Simulation Vol. 8, No. 1, January pp.3-30 1998.@*
@url{http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=272995}

@anchor{oleg1}
@item [OLEG1]
Oleg Kiselyov, Making sense of an input stream,@*
@url{http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/Scheme/parsing.html}.

@anchor{oleg2}
@item [OLEG2]
Oleg Kiselyov, General ways to traverse collections,,@*
@url{http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/Scheme/enumerators-callcc.html}.
2000.
@end table

@c Local variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c coding: utf-8
@c end:
